Present Screeve: The Georgian present screeve corresponds to the English present tense (for example, ‘he holds it, ‘he is holding it’, ‘he does hold it’). It is used to describe an action or condition in present time, or to state something that is generally valid. 

The Present Subjunctive Screeve: The Georgian present subjunctive screeve (also known as the present conjunctive) is used to express possible actions that might occur. It is found in hypothetical conditions (usually introduced in Georgian by the conjunction რომ rom ‘if’), as in ‘if he were holding it…’, which highlights the fact that he is not actually holding it at the moment. 

The Future Screeve: The Georgian future screeve corresponds to the English future tense (for example, ‘he will hold it’). 

The Conditional Screeve: The Georgian conditional screeve is used to express repeated actions that have been completed in the past, as in ‘he used to hold it’, ‘he would hold it’. It is often accompanied in Georgian by the iterative marker ხოლმე kholme ‘used to, was wont to’, and, in this sense, it is similar to the imperfect, the main difference being in that the repeated action is viewed as having being completed.

This screeve is also used to express the result of meeting conditions that do not correspond to reality (usually introduced in Georgian by the conjunction რომ rom ‘if’), as in ‘if he were to retire [present subjunctive] early, he would have [conditional] much more leisure time.’ 

The Future Subjunctive Screeve: The Georgian future subjunctive screeve (also known as the future conjunctive) is used to express possible single completed actions that might occur in the future. It is found in hypothetical conditions (usually introduced in Georgian by the conjunction რომ rom ‘if’), as in ‘if he were to hold it…’, which highlights the fact that he is not  actually expected to hold it. It is also used in expressions of wishes and desires. 

The Aorist Screeve: The Georgian aorist screeve is used to express a single completed action in the past, such as ‘he held it’. There is also a rare form of this screeve without a preverb, and not described here, that expresses uncompleted action in the past.

The Optative Screeve: The optative screeve (also known as the aorist subjunctive or aorist conjunctive) is used to express a possible completed action in present or future time, as in ‘perhaps he may hold it.’ It is also used with the conjunction რომ rom ‘(in order) to’ to express purpose, as in ‘I will open the window to let some air in.’ 

The Perfect Screeve: The perfect screeve (also known as the present perfect, first evidential or resultative) describes completed actions in the past, the result of which is evident in the present. There is also a rare form of this screeve without a preverb, and not described here, that expresses uncompleted action. Inversion occurs in the perfect screeve for all verbs, except those in Class 2.

The perfect is used where the speaker infers that an action must have taken place in the past. It is often accompanied by the particle თურმე turme, which is sometimes approximated by 'apparently, it appears, it seems’. It is important to note that this particle does not introduce any doubt as to the veracity of what is being reported; rather, it adds the nuance that the speaker was not present at the event and is not an eyewitness. 

The Pluperfect Screeve: The pluperfect screeve (also known as the second evidential or resultative) describes completed actions in the past that have occurred earlier than the main time reference, which is also in the past. This corresponds to the English pluperfect tense in ‘he had seen him before the lesson started’.

The Perfect Subjunctive Screeve: The perfect subjunctive screeve (also known as the third subjunctive) is rarely encountered in Modern Georgian. It is used for hypothetical actions in the past and for the formal expression of wishes and desires. It occurs in forms with and without a preverb.

The Imperfect Screeve: The Georgian imperfect screeve expresses ongoing or repeated action in the past, as in ‘he was holding it’ or ‘he used to hold it’. 
